
## https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/haecceitism/

haecceitism, according to which the world could differ `non-qualitatively` without differing `qualitatively`. So, if the alternative history described above where Double replaces you is a genuine possibility, it is a `maximal possibility`—i.e., a total way the world could be—that `differs haecceitistically` from actuality.

According to `anti-haecceitism`, there are no haecceitistic differences between maximal possibilities. The world could not be haecceitistically different without being qualitatively different.


the correct analysis of modality involves `no quantification over possibilities or possible worlds`. (On modalism, see Forbes (1992), Melia (2003: 81–98) and Peacocke (1999: 155–159).) 

But, following Skow (2008), the modalist can nevertheless characterize anti-haecceitism as `Modalist Anti-Haecceitism`: Necessarily, the world could not be non-qualitatively different without being qualitatively different. Haecceitism is therefore equivalent to the denial of Modalist Anti-Haecceitism.

`if quantification over possibilities is permitted`, `two distinctions` among possibilities prove especially useful for formulating haecceitism.

* some possibilities are maximal: they are total ways the entire world could have been. So, for any possibility, `a maximal possibility includes that possibility or its negation`. (On some views, talk of possibilities including other possibilities is understood in terms of `entailment`. On other views, “inclusion” is understood in terms of set membership—e.g., membership relations between sets of propositions. Here, inclusion is taken as a neutral bit of terminology.) In contrast, non-maximal possibilities like the possibility that Obama is human are less than total ways things could have been.
* A second distinction among possibilities divides non-qualitative possibilities, which are ways specific individuals like Napoleon or Nefertiti could have been, from qualitative possibilities, which are not tied to any specific individuals. So, for example, `the possibility that Napoleon escapes Elba is non-qualitative`, while `the possibility that there are four red objects is a qualitative possibility`. (On some views, the distinction between qualitative and non-qualitative possibilities can be identified with or analyzed in terms of the distinction between `de dicto and de re possibilities`.)

`Possibility Haecceitism`: There are distinct maximal possibilities that differ only with respect to the non-qualitative possibilities they include.

Although Possibility Haecceitism requires quantification over possibilities, it remains silent about `possible worlds`. But, for most realists about possible worlds, quantification over maximal possibilities requires or is simply equivalent to quantification over possible worlds. 

`World Indiscernibility`: There are distinct possible worlds that are qualitatively indiscernible.

As Lewis (1986: 220–247) and Skow (2008) point out, however, `World Indiscernibility is a misleading way to express haecceitism` given certain views about possible worlds.

According to `ersatzist views`, which identify possible worlds with abstract entities like sentence-types, properties, propositions, or sets, the truth of World Indiscernibility will turn, not on whether there are distinctively haecceitistic possibilities, but on whether such entities are qualitatively indiscernible from one another. (Qualitatively indiscernible entities share all their qualitative properties, while qualitative duplicates share only their intrinsic qualitative properties.) So, if one holds that sets or propositions have no qualitative features, then World Indiscernibility is true, regardless of one’s views about what is and what is not possible. So, for many ersatzists, the status of `World Indiscernibility does not depend upon any distinctive modal commitments`, but is settled by apparently orthogonal questions regarding the `nature of the abstract entities with which possible worlds are identified`.

Although formulations of haecceitism tailored to various ersatzist views differ significantly, they typically share a commitment to a one-one correspondence between possible worlds and maximal possibilities. This correspondence allows ersatzists to treat talk of maximal possibilities and possible worlds as largely interchangeable for most theoretical purposes. Ersatzists who accept Possibility Haecceitism therefore commonly endorse the following thesis:

`World Haecceitism`: There are distinct maximal possibilities that differ only haecceitistically and there is a one-to-one correspondence between possible worlds and the maximal possibilities they represent.

On issues that arise in formulating haecceitism, see Lewis (1986: 220–247), Russell (2013a), Skow (2008, 2011), and Stalnaker (2011). Kaplan (1975) is an importantly early contribution where, among other things, Kaplan attributes the use of the label ‘haecceitism’ to R.M. Adams. On the ways in which Kaplan’s use of ‘haecceitism’ departs from now-standard uses, see Stalnaker (2011: 54–62). For other issues in characterizing haecceitism, see Graff Fara (2009), Torza (2012) and Scarpati (2021).

### Haecceitism and Modal Realism

While ersatzist views identify possible worlds with abstract entities, Lewisian modal realism identifies possible worlds with maximal sums of (analogically) spatiotemporally interrelated entities. According to Lewisian modal realism, `for any way things could have been, there is some possible world that represents that possibility.` Moreover, these possible worlds `are no less “real” or concrete than our actual world`. (Lewis characterizes these possible worlds as “concrete” only with reservation, given competing, non-equivalent conceptions of the abstract-concrete distinction.)

Within `Lewisian modal realism`, de re modality is analyzed in terms of Lewis’ distinctive and controversial counterpart theory. According to `counterpart theory`, ordinary individuals are not numerically identical or “bilocated” across possible worlds. Instead, possible individuals are worldbound, existing in only one world, and possess their de re modal properties in virtue of bearing counterpart relations to other possible entities. Roughly put, counterpart theory holds that an individual a is possibly F if and only if a has a counterpart that is F, where counterpart relations are relations of qualitative resemblance between possible individuals. So, according to Lewis’ counterpart-theoretic treatment of de re modality, `it is true that Obama could have been a doctor if and only if there is some possible individual that appropriately resembles Obama and is a doctor`. De re modality is therefore a matter of resemblance relations between parts of possible worlds although the relevant resemblance relations vary from context to context. (Lewis’ views on counterpart theory and counterpart relations change over time, see Lewis (1968, 1986). On counterpart theory, see Graff Fara (2009), Fara and Williamson (2005), and Hazen (1979).)

Since Lewis analyzes de re representation—i.e., the way in which entities represent de re possibilities—in terms of qualitative resemblance, counterpart relations never divide qualitatively indiscernible entities. Therefore, for any qualitatively indiscernible entities x and y in a given context, x is a counterpart of z if and only if y is a counterpart of z. This commitment has serious consequences for the modal realist treatment of haecceitism. In particular, it guarantees that `qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds do not differ in terms of what de re possibilities they represent`. Lewis therefore endorses the following thesis about the connection between qualitative properties and what de re possibilities a world represents:

`Qualitative Supervenience`: Facts about what worlds represent de re supervene upon facts about the qualitative properties of worlds.

As Lewis uses “haecceitism”, it is the `denial of Qualitative Supervenience` and therefore the claim that non-qualitative features of worlds at least partially determine what worlds represent de re. (On the relation of supervenience, see the entry by McLaughlin and Bennett.) For modal realists who would reject Qualitative Supervenience, qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds can differ with respect to which de re possibilities they represent. Non-Lewisian modal realists of this sort can therefore hold qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds to represent maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically. But, since `Lewis endorses Qualitative Supervenience`, he claims that qualitatively indiscernible worlds represent the very `same possibilities`. Positing qualitative indiscernible worlds therefore provides Lewis with no additional resource for making sense of haecceitistic differences. (Lewis is officially agnostic about whether there are any qualitatively indiscernible worlds. See Lewis (1986: 224).) As a consequence, `Lewis holds that we go wrong in assimilating questions of haecceitism to questions about qualitatively indiscernible worlds. For Lewis, haecceitism is an issue regarding how possible worlds represent de re possibilities. So, even if Lewis were to posit distinct yet qualitatively indiscernible worlds, they would differ non-qualitatively but not haecceitistically in the Lewisian sense.`

Since qualitatively indiscernible worlds are no help to Lewis in accounting for haecceitistic possibilities—e.g., where two twins swap their qualitative roles—and `Lewis does take these to be genuine possibilities`, he offers an important modification to his earlier version of counterpart theory that seeks to accommodate such possibilities. Lewis’ modified counterpart theory permits individuals to have multiple counterparts within the actual world. (See Lewis (1967, 1983, and 1986).) So, in the case of our two twins, the firstborn twin has its second-born twin as one of its counterparts. In certain linguistic contexts, the second-born twin therefore represents a possibility for the firstborn—namely, the possibility of occupying precisely the qualitative role of the second-born twin. In this way, the actual world and its parts will, in suitable contexts, represent, not only the actualized maximal possibility, but also maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically from the actualized maximal possibility. Context permitting, each possible world can therefore represent a plurality of maximal possibilities `each of which differ haecceitistically from one another`. And, since Lewis’ modified counterpart theory holds a single possible world and its parts to represent distinct maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically, it accommodates the representation of such possibilities without multiplying possible worlds. Lewis describes this view as “haecceitism on the cheap.” Understood in terms set out above, this “cheap substitute for haecceitism” `entails Possibility Haecceitism yet rejects World Haecceitism`.

In denying World Haecceitism, Lewis forgoes a one-to-one correspondence between maximal possibilities and possible worlds. This feature proves significant in several discussions about the tenability of “cheap haecceitism.” Graff Fara (2009) argues that, by rejecting World Haecceitism, cheap haecceitism cannot satisfactorily interpret modal logic enriched with an actuality operator. Kment (2012) also argues that cheap haecceitism delivers an inadequate treatment of chances and counterfactuals, while Stalnaker (2008: 69–71) suggests that semantic considerations support World Haecceitism over cheap haecceitism. On early challenges to counterpart theory, see Kripke (1980) and Hazen (1979). On counterpart theory, actuality, and haecceitism, see Baltimore (2014), Cowling (2013), and Russell (2013a, 2013b).

......


## https://philpapers.org/browse/immunity-to-error-through-misidentification

It is often held that a characteristic feature of some self-conscious thoughts, that is, thoughts with `first-person content or 'I'-thoughts`, is their immunity to error through misidentification relative to the first-person pronoun. The claim is that when thinking or expressing certain 'I'-thoughts, the subject can be mistaken with respect to the property that is being self-ascribed, but not with respect to the subject of the `self-ascription`. For example, when I judge on the basis of my experience that I have a toothache, I cannot be mistaken with respect to the point that it is really me who has the toothache. Many authors think that an understanding of immunity to error through misidentification is `essential for a theory of self-consciousness and self-knowledge`. However, there are many open questions with respect to, for instance, different varieties of immunity to error through misidentification, the `distinction between logical and contingent immunity`, the relation between judgments containing the first-person pronoun and those containing indexical and demonstrative terms, and alleged empirical counter-examples to the immunity principle.

The phenomenon of immunity to error through misidentification was first discussed by `Wittgenstein 1958`, who distinguished between the use of 'I' 'as subject' and the use of 'I' as object, where the former is thought to be immune to error through misidentification. The notion of immunity to error through misidentification relative to the first-person pronoun was introduced into the literature by `Shoemaker 1968` whose work together with the work of `Evans 1982` influenced much of the contemporary discussion. `Pryor 1999` and `Coliva 2006` distinguish different types of immunity. `Campbell 1999` and `Coliva 2002` discuss whether the phenomenon of thought insertion in schizophrenia constitutes a counter-example to the immunity principle. A recent collection of new essays on immunity is `Prosser & Recanati 2012`.

## https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/self-consciousness/scope-of-immunity.html

### 涉及“I”的陈述句有些是IEM有些不是IEM

Since its early discussion in the work of Wittgenstein (1958), Shoemaker (1968), and Evans (1982), the topic of immunity to error through misidentification (IEM) has received a great deal of attention (see, for example, Prosser & Recanati 2012). The standard view is that some but not all first-person thoughts are IEM. For example, the thought “I am happy”, when based on `introspection, is typically regarded as IEM`. It is intuitive to suppose that introspection is necessarily an awareness of one’s own mental features; one cannot introspect another’s mind. It is, therefore, difficult to see how one might know, via introspection, that a has a headache if a is not oneself. Given this, one will not be able to misidentify an introspectively presented subject as oneself. On the other hand, the thought “I am happy”, based on `an overheard conversation between two therapists (治疗师)`, is not plausibly IEM, since it is possible that one has misidentified the person spoken about as oneself.

### 是IEM的信息来源 <-> 如果信息来源奠基de re思想（a is F），则 a=I

There is a question about which sources of information, aside from introspection (see entry on introspection), ground IEM judgements. Candidate sources that have generated significant debate include `episodic memory` (Shoemaker 1970; Evans 1982: §7.5; Hamilton 2009, 2013; Bermúdez 2012, 2013; Fernandez 2014; entry on memory), `bodily awareness` (Evans 1982: §7.3; Cassam 1997: §2.7; Bermúdez 1998: ch. 6; O’Brien 2007: ch. 11; Chen 2011; de Vignemont 2012, entry on bodily awareness), `action awareness` (O’Brien 2007: ch. 11, and 2012; Peacocke 2008: ch. 7), and `“self-locating” perceptual experience` (Evans 1982: §7.3; Cassam 1997: §2.7). In each of these cases, we would normally suppose that errors of misidentification do not occur. If I know, through an episodic memory of eating breakfast, that a had toast for breakfast, I thereby know that I had toast for breakfast; if I know, through bodily awareness (including proprioception 本体感知 and kinaesthesia 动觉), that a has crossed legs, I thereby know that I have crossed legs; if I know, through action awareness, that a is typing, I thereby know that I am typing; if I know, via the `“self-locating” egocentric structure of perceptual experience`, that a is facing a wall, I thereby know that I am facing a wall. In each case, it might be thought, since the information source in question is dedicated to a single object, oneself, it cannot `ground` the `de re thought` a is F unless a is oneself. It will follow from this that `self-ascriptions grounded in these forms of awareness cannot be based on a false identification of some object as oneself`.

### 反例：扭曲因果链奠基de re思想（a is F）且a不等于I <-> 不是IEM的信息来源

In each of these cases, however, including that of introspection, `counter-examples` have been offered (for discussion, see the works cited in the previous paragraph). These take one of two forms: either thought experiments or actual, typically pathological, cases. Fantasy cases typically involve `a deviant causal chain leading from another person’s memory, bodily state, action, etc. to oneself.` Thus, taking the example of bodily awareness, we can imagine that I am hooked up in such a way that my proprioceptive system receives input from the state of your body. This “`quasi-proprioception 准本体感知`”, it might be claimed, is sufficient to ground the thought that a is F and, if I am unaware of my unusual situation, I am liable to think that I am F. That judgement, then, must rely on the implicit identification of myself with a (O’Brien 2007: ch.11). `If this is right`, then whilst we might say that proprioceptively grounded self-ascriptions do not typically involve misidentification, this is at best a `contingent truth`. Such self-ascriptions are, in Shoemaker’s term, `only de facto 事实上 IEM` (Shoemaker 1970: 46, where he also introduces the notion of `quasi-memory`). This conclusion `depends on the claim that such deviant causal chains are sufficient to ground the de re thoughts in question`. But that this is so cannot simply be assumed. As such, the status of the various information sources as grounding IEM thoughts `depends at least in part on the conditions of de re, or singular, thought `(cf. Evans 1982: ch.4; Recanati 1993; Daly 2007; Jeshion 2010; Michael 2010).

### 典型反例：记忆植入思考P，不会得到我思考P

Actual cases vary, but it has sometimes been suggested that the phenomena of `thought insertion` (Stephens & Graham 2000; Mullins & Spence 2003), `alien limb` (Moro, Zampini, & Aglioti 2004), `anarchic hand` (Marchetti & Della Sala 1998), `“anonymous memory”` (Klein & Nichols 2012), and `“anonymous vision”` (Zahn, Talazko, & Ebert 2008), are counterexamples to the claims that thoughts based, respectively, on introspection, bodily awareness, action-awareness, episodic memory, and perceptual experience, are IEM (Campbell 1999b; Marcel 2003; Lane & Liang 2011; Gallagher 2012: ch.7). In each of these cases, subjects seem to be aware of some state of theirs—a thought, memory, visual experience, etc.—without it seeming to be their own state (also see Langland-Hassan 2015). For example, `whilst it is true that the subject of thought-insertion is thinking that P, they do not take that thought to be their own and so do not form the judgement “I think that P”`. It seems, then, that these forms of awareness do not suffice to ground the relevant self-ascription, so thoughts grounded in these various modalities are not IEM (for critical discussion, see Gallagher 2000; Coliva 2002; Peacocke 2003; de Vignemont 2012; Seeger 2015).

### 反对反例：反例没有涉及识别“I=a”的错误

These actual cases differ from the fantasy cases in an important respect. Whilst they arguably involve errors of misidentification, they seem not to be errors of misidentification relative to the first-person pronoun, since none involve the first-person concept. `In none of the cases do subjects judge themselves to be some way or other`; quite the opposite. The subject of thought insertion is aware of what is, in fact, their own thought, but attributes it to someone else, failing to make the appropriate first-person judgement. It is helpful here to distinguish between errors of `self-misidentification`, in which the subject mistakenly takes a distinct thing or person to be themselves and so `mistakenly judges “I am F”`, and errors of `other-misidentification`, in which the subject mistakenly takes what is in fact themselves to be some thing, or someone, else and so `mistakenly judges “a is F”`. The cases that are typically discussed in this context usually involve mistakenly taking oneself to be someone else (or, in some cases, simply failing to form any relevant belief as to who is F), and so are `not cases of self-misidentification`, but rather of other-misidentification (cf. de Vignemont 2012). But IEM, as typically understood, concerns an immunity to self-misidentification. Thus, since `none of these cases seem to involve errors grounded in the false identity judgement “I=a”`, whatever it is that they do show, none obviously challenge the claim that when these various information sources do ground self-ascriptions, those first-personal thoughts are IEM.


## https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/4AB9Wg7jjStgrvsh2/primitive-perspectives-and-sleeping-beauty-1

This is another attempt to promote my solution to anthropic paradoxes (perspective-based reasoning, PBR).

I propose the `first-person perspective shall be considered a primitive axiomatic fact`. "I naturally know I am this particular person, yet there is no underlying reason for why it is so. I just am." Taking the first-person perspective as a given, recognizing there is no rational way to analyze it would solve anthropic paradoxes and more.

This is in stark contrast to the conventional approach: considering it as an Observation Selection Effect (OSE), `treating the first-person perspective as a random sample like SSA or SIA does`. I discussed the main differences in a previous post. Here I will explain how it answers problems like sleeping beauty.

### The Fission Problem With a Toss

Imagine during tonight's sleep, an advanced alien would toss a fair coin. If Tails it would split you into 2 halves right through the middle. He will then complete each part by accurately cloning the missing half onto it. By the end, there will be two copies of you with memories preserved, indiscernible to human cognition. If Heads, nothing happens and you would wake up just as usual. After waking up from this experiment, and not knowing if you have been split, how should you reason about the probability that "yesterday's coin landed Heads?"

(For easy communication, let's call the split copy with the same left-half body as yesterday L and the copy with the same right-half body R. )

The experiment is set up so that there are 2 epistemically similar observers in the case of Tails, while only 1 if Heads. This can also be achieved by straight cloning without going through the splitting processes. I choose to present the experiment this way for consistency as I have used a similar thought experiment in the previous post.

### PBR's Answer

The answer is `1/2` because there is no new information waking up the next day. But that is nothing new. What I want to point out is the probability of 1/2 can be verified by a frequentist model.

Picture yourself participating. After waking up the second day, it doesn't matter if I am the original person or L or R, I can take part in another iteration of the same experiment. After waking up from the second experiment I can do it again, and so on. Since it is a fair coin, as the iteration increases the relative frequency of Heads I experienced would approach 1/2. There would exist another copy in Tails experiments, but `it doesn't change the relative frequency of the coin toss for me`.

PBR `differs from traditional halfers` regarding self-locating probability. For example, given the coin toss landed Tails, what is the probability that I am L? Traditional halfers endorsing SSA would treat the first-person perspective as a random sample drawn from the two copies, giving equal probabilities to "I am L" and "I am R". But PBR recognizes there is no good way to explain the first-person perspective. So there is no valid probability value. This can also be verified by the frequentist model.

If I take part in multiple experiments as described above, then among all Tails experiments, there is no reason for the relative frequency of "me being L" to converge to any particular value. Obviously, half of all copies are L while the other half R. If we consider all copies produced in the experiment the fraction of L would be 1/2. Yet there is no way to say what relative fraction I will experience personally. Not without additional assumptions such as the first-person perspective is a random sample, . (A more detailed discussion about self-locating probability is available in this previous post)

### Perspective Disagreement

Suppose the resulting copy/copies of the experiment are put into two separate rooms (1 room will be empty if Heads). A Friend of yours randomly enters one of the two rooms and meets you. `You can communicate freely`. How should you two reason about the probability that yesterday's coin landed Heads?

For the Friend, one of the two rooms would be empty if the coin landed on Heads. Both rooms would be occupied if the coin landed Tails. Therefore seeing the randomly chosen room occupied would lead to a Bayesian update and cause the `probability of Heads to become 1/3`.

For me, however, it doesn't matter how the coin landed, `there is a constant 50% chance of meeting the Friend`. Therefore seeing the friend does not change the probability of the coin toss.

For thirders, there is nothing worth noting. They arrived at the answer of 1/3 through a similar thought process: SIA treats the first person as a random sample from all potential observers just like the Friend sampling the rooms.

But for halfers, this presents a rather peculiar case. `While the Friend and I can share whatever information we wish, we are still giving different answers. This problem has been discovered by Katja Grace and John Pittard about a decade ago.` Yet, to my knowledge, traditional halfers do not have a satisfactory explanation.

My approach gives a very straightforward answer to it. `The first-person perspective is primitive and cannot be explained, thus incommunicable`. To the Friend, he has met a non-specific copy. If the coin landed Tails and there are two copies, it does not matter which one he meets, his analysis would be the same. However, from my perspective, he met someone specific: the first-person me. I can try to share this information with the Friend by saying "It's me you are seeing!". Yet that specification would mean nothing to him.

This disagreement is also valid for the frequentists. If I take part in say 1000 iterations of the experiment, then I would roughly experience about 500 Heads/Tails. I would also see the Friend about 500 times, with about 250 times in Heads experiments and 250 in Tails experiments. The relative fraction of Heads where I meet the Friend is still 1/2. If the Friend takes part in 1000 experiments, he will have about 750 meetings. Out of which, 250 will be Heads. The relative fraction is 1/3 for him. The difference is due to the Friend meeting "the other copy" instead of me specifically.

### New Information About First-Person Perspective

Suppose you ask the experimenter "Is the left side of my body the same old part from yesterday?" and got a positive answer. How should you reason about the probability of Heads?

Traditional halfers would incorporate this information through a Bayesian update. If Heads, I am the original copy. My left side is guaranteed to be the same as yesterday. If Tails, they would assign an equal probability for me to be L or R. Knowing my left side is the same eliminates the case for R. The probability of Tails is halved while Heads remains. Renormalizing gives P(Heads) equals 2/3.

(Thirders perform a similar update but with a different prior which gives a probability of 1/2. )

According to PBR, the above Bayesian update is `invalid since it requires analyzing "what the first-person perspective is?"`. In the case of Tails, there is no proper way to reason which one of the two copies is the first person, so no valid probability for "I am L" or "I am R". The subsequent elimination and renormalization, therefore, has no logical basis.

Again this can be shown with the frequentist model. Repeating the experiment a large number of times would lead me to experience about equal numbers of Heads vs Tails. However, in these experiments, among iteration coin landed Tails, the relative frequency of "I am L" would not converge to any value. (`Half of all copies are L, but that is regarding all copies instead of the specific first-person.`) Consequently, among all experiments where "my left side is the same as yesterday" the relative frequency of Heads would not converge on any particular value.

For example, repeating the experiment 1000 times would give about 500 Heads and Tails each. Say, I am the copy who is L 400 times in the 500 Tails cases, then the fraction of Heads where "my left side is the same" would be 5/9. If I am a different physical person, say the R in all 500 Tails cases, then the fraction of Heads would be 100% when "my left side is the same". The long-run frequency solely depends on which physical copy I am. And there is no proper way to reason about it. `Traditional camps have no trouble generating a value only because they make additional assumptions explaining what the first-person perspective is, such as regarding it a selection outcome from all copies.`

So for new information regarding the first-person perspective (self-locating information is the term), no Bayesian update can be performed. Such information about` which person I am shall be treated as primitively given`. There is no way to analyze why it is so. Now it is known that I am the one with the same left side as yesterday. And for this particular physical person, the long-run frequency of Heads is still 1/2. Consistent with the no-update value.

### Back to Sleeping Beauty

Fission with Toss and Sleeping Beauty Problem are equivalents in terms of anthropics. Each camp, (SSA, SIA, PBR) gives the same answer to both problems. For PBR, note the first-person perspective not only primitively identifies an agent I. It also identifies the moment now.

The sleeping beauty problem has its positives and negatives. On one hand, it is a remarkably concise and non-exotic problem that gathered a lot of attention for anthropics. But at the same time, `creating similar epistemic instances using memory erasure can easily lead to misguided intuitions`. For example, when attempting to solve it with a frequentist approach, people often assume new iterations take place chronologically in succession, i.e. after Tuesday. Yet this only allows the first-person experience of the last awakenings to accumulate. The correct model should be a bifurcating tree, each iteration takes half the duration as the previous so all experiments happen in the original two days' time.

Just like in Fission and Toss, PBR suggests the probability of Heads is 1/2 and remains at 1/2 after learning it is Monday. Furthermore, there is no valid probability for self-locating beliefs such as "now is Monday". `Double-halfers have been trying to find ways to justify why there shouldn't be a Bayesian update. But all attempts so far have been unsuccessful`. `Michael Titelbaum` has a strong and, in my opinion, conclusive counter. He showed that as long as we assign a non-zero probability to "today is Tuesday" double halving fails. PBR does not suffer from this pitfall.

PBR solves the three major problems faced by halfers all at once: 
1. lack of a frequentist model, 
2. reason for double-halving, and 
3. disagreement between communicating parties. Furthermore, it does not suffer from other paradoxes such as Doomsday Argument or Presumptuous Philosopher.